Text classification involves categorizing or classifying text documents into various predefined categories based on inherent properties or attributes of each text document. The steps of building a text classification system include preparing train and test datasets (optionally a validation dataset), preprocessing and normalize text documents, feature extraction and engineering, model training, model prediction and evaluation, and model deployment. Document classification or document categorization is a problem in library science, information science and computer science. The task is to assign a document to one or more classes or categories. This may be done "manually" (or "intellectually") or algorithmically. The intellectual classification of documents has mostly been the province of library science, while the algorithmic classification of documents is mainly in information science and computer science. The problems are overlapping, however, and there is therefore interdisciplinary research on document classification. There are 2 types of text classification: "Content-based" and "request-based" classification. Content-based classification is classification in which the weight given to particular subjects in a document determines the class to which the document is assigned. It is, for example, a common rule for classification in libraries, that at least 20% of the content of a book should be about the class to which the book is assigned.[1] In automatic classification it could be the number of times given words appears in a document. Request-oriented classification (or -indexing) is classification in which the anticipated request from users is influencing how documents are being classified. The classifier asks themself: “Under which descriptors should this entity be found?” and “think of all the possible queries and decide for which ones the entity at hand is relevant” (Soergel, 1985, p. 230[2]). Request-oriented classification may be classification that is targeted towards a particular audience or user group. For example, a library or a database for feminist studies may classify/index documents differently when compared to a historical library. It is probably better, however, to understand request-oriented classification as policy-based classification: The classification is done according to some ideals and reflects the purpose of the library or database doing the classification. In this way it is not necessarily a kind of classification or indexing based on user studies. Only if empirical data about use or users are applied should request-oriented classification be regarded as a user-based approach. The documents to be classified may be texts, images, music, etc. Each kind of document possesses its special classification problems. When not otherwise specified, text classification is implied. Documents may be classified according to their subjects or according to other attributes (such as document type, author, printing year etc.). In the rest of this article only subject classification is considered. There are two main philosophies of subject classification of documents: the content-based approach and the request-based approach. Sentiment analysis or opinion mining is a computational study of opinions, sentiments, attitudes, appraisal, affects, views, emotions, etc., expressed in texts where it involves analyzing some textual documents and predicting the sentiment or opinion based on the content of these documents. There are 2 main techniques (approaches) in sentiment analysis: lexicon-based approach and machine learning approach. The lexicon-based approach is based on using a set of sentiment terms, called the sentiment lexicon. The machine learning approach in sentiment analysis involves training a model to classify the sentiment of a text. There are 2 types of opinions: Regular opinions and Comparative opinions. Regular opinions are Sentiment/opinion expressions on some target entities. Comparative opinions are comparisons of more than one. Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) is a text analysis technique that categorizes data by aspect and identifies the sentiment attributed to each one. Aspect-based sentiment analysis can be used to analyze customer feedback by associating specific sentiments with different aspects of a product or service. 